\subsection*{Two neuron connections}

A prominent structure of nonrandom connectivity in cortical circuits
is the abundance of reciprocal connections. In networks in which nodes
are connected randomly with probability $p$, such reciprocally connected
pairs occur with a low probability of $p^2$. Experimental results in
 rat visual cortex \cite{Song2005} and somatosensory cortex
\cite{Markram1997, Perin2011} however indicate that reciprocally
connected pairs of layer 5 pyramidal neurons occur much more often
than in a randomly connected network of the same connection density.

We analyzed whether such bidirectionally connected pairs also occur
abundantly in anisotropic networks. Indeed, we find that reciprocal
connections are overrepresented in both anisotropic in tuned
anisotropic networks (\figref{fig:two_neuron}A). However, it is yet
unclear whether this overrepresentation is a direct result of
anisotropy in spatial connectivity. To test this we also determined
the occurrence of unconnected, unidirectionally and bidirectionally
connected pairs in rewired and distance-dependent networks
(\figref{fig:two_neuron}B). We found that the different pair motifs
occur approximately equally often in the three network
types. Reciprocal connections are thus overrepresented in anisotropic,
rewired and distance-dependent networks to equal degree.

\input{figures/figure_3.tex}

% What organization principle then causes the overrepresentation?
By construction anisotropic, rewired and distance-dependent networks
share the same distance-dependent connection probabilities
(\figref{fig:4_net_models}G-H). It is thus natural to assume that it
is the distance-dependent connectivity in the networks that induces
the overabundance of reciprocal connections. Indeed, as connection
probabilities within a pair are identical for both directions of
connection, an overrepresentation of bidirectional connection is
necessarily induced in the network as a result of Jensen's inequality
\cite{Hoffmann2017}. Is this effect sufficient to explain the
experimentally observed overabundance of reciprocal connections? For
this we considered the probability of a pair at a given inter-neuron
distance to be bidirectionally connected
(\figref{fig:two_neuron}C-D). While the overall connection probability
in tuned anisotropic networks matched the data from
\textcite{Perin2011} (\figref{fig:two_neuron}C), the
distance-dependent probability for reciprocally connected pairs was
much lower than in the experimental results
(\figref{fig:two_neuron}D). Taken together the results suggest that in
cortical circuits organization principles that go beyond anisotropy in
connectivity drive the overrepresentation of bidirectional
connections. Possible candidates for this are for example synapse
dynamics that support bidirectional connections \cite{Clopath2010} or
any other neuron attributes that might affect connection probabilities
in a pair-symmetric manner \cite{Hoffmann2017, Lee2016a}.

