
We generated samples of anisotropic and tuned anisotropic networks and
their respective rewired and distance-dependent versions (see
Methods). We analyzed the connectivity structures in these networks
and tested which connectivity features emerge from anisotropy in
spatial connectivity.

\subsection{Degree distributions}

The number of connections that a node in the network receives
(in-degree) or makes to other nodes (out-degree) is an important
indicator of the network structure and can strongly affect its
dynamics \cite{Roxin2011a, Martens2017}. In our model in-degree
distributions in the anisotropic, rewired and distance-dependent
networks matched, but were in general broader than the in-degree
distribution in random networks of the same connection probability
(\figref{fig:io_deg}A-B). Out-degree distributions on the other hand
were very broad in anisotropic and rewired networks while
distance-dependent networks maintained a distribution similar to the
in-degree (\figref{fig:io_deg}C-D). These stretched out distributions
in anisotropic networks are a result of some axons being \enquote{cut
  off} at a short length, while other axons travel across the network
surface in full length and make numerous connections along the
way. The observed difference between in-degree and out-degree
distributions in anisotropic networks could be expected in the
connectome of slice experiments as well. For this study, we maintain
both the distance-dependent and rewired networks as reference models
such that features that appear in anisotropic networks but not in
rewired and distance-dependent networks can be truthfully attributed
to anisotropy in connectivity.

\input{figures/figure_03.tex}

        
\subsection{Rewired networks}

We verified that the rewiring algorithm indeed works as expected. For
this Indeed, taking the vector (see Methods) that rewiring more and
more of the graph shifts the. Distance-dependent connection
probabilities (\figref{fig:4_net_models}G) and degree distributions
(\figref{fig:io_deg}A-D) remain by architecture of the rewiring
algorithm unchanged. We further tested if additionally rewiring.

Taken together, rewired networks provide a reference to distinguish
feature that arrise solely due to anisotropy in spatial connectivity.


% \begin{itemize}
% \item  degree distribution unchanged
% \item  anisotropy reduced (measure)
% \item  further rewiring (rewiring the rewired network) does not change things  
% \end{itemize}




